# A general model for the evolution of live birth in lizards

Guillermo Garcia-Costoya<sup>1</sup>, Saúl Domínguez-Guerrero<sup>2,3</sup>, Lutz Fromhage<sup>4</sup>, Matthew A. Gifford<sup>5</sup>, Eric A. Riddell<sup>6</sup>, Michael L. Logan<sup>1</sup>.

Affiliations: <sup>1</sup>1Department of Biology and Program in Ecology, Evolution, and Conservation Biology, University of Nevada, Reno, Reno, NV, 89557, USA. <sup>2</sup>2Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New Haven, CT, 06511, USA. <sup>3</sup>Yale Institute for Biospheric Studies, Yale University, New Haven, CT, 06511 USA. <sup>4</sup>Department of Biological and Environmental Science, University of Jyvaskyla, Jyvaskyla, Finland. <sup>5</sup>University of Central Arkansas, 201 Donaghey Ave., LSC 180, Conway, AR 72035, USA. <sup>6</sup>Department of Biology, University of North Carolina – Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, 27599, USA.

### Abstract

Life-history traits evolve to optimize fitness trade-offs over ontogeny. Potentially to mediate the trade-off between survival and fecundity, multiple taxa have independently evolved live birth (viviparity), including at least 70 transitions in lizards alone. In lizards, viviparity is thought to evolve as a mechanism to improve embryonic development in cold climates (cold climate hypothesis, or CCH), potentially at the expense of the mother’s survival. Past comparative studies often align with the CCH’s predictions, but they usually treat core features of the hypothesis (e.g., the roles played by behavioral thermoregulation and variation in life-history traits) as implicit and, most importantly, typically infer process from pattern rather than testing causal mechanisms, leaving the CCH without unequivocal support. To address this, we developed a process-based model that integrates behavior, thermal physiology, life history, and climate to predict optimal gestation length. We generated a comprehensive trait database of 89 globally distributed lizard populations that vary in parity mode, and we used ecophysiological modelling to test our model’s predictive power. Our model produced generally accurate predictions, strongly supporting the hypothesis that suboptimal climates favor the evolution of viviparity in lizards and revealing the ecological contexts and underlying mechanisms by which this life history strategy evolves. 

### Repository structure

